\section{Numerical results}

Here we describe two types of test: unstructured IB points, in which points are
placed randomly in the domain and generate a force independently from the other
IB points, and structured IB points, in which the points comprise an elastic
structure and forces are generated based on the configuration of the points as
a whole. For these tests, we consider a $16\um\times16\um\times16\um$ triply
periodic domain with an initial shear-like flow,
$\vec{u} = (0,\,0,\,\dot{\gamma}(y-8\um))$, with shear rate
$\dot{\gamma} = 1000\si{\per\second}$. This flow has a sharp transition at the
periodic boundary $y=0\um$, so a background force is added to maintain this
transition and so that the initial flow is also the steady flow in the absence
of other forces, as in [@Fai:XXX].

Serial and multicore CPU tests were performed on a single node with 48
Intel\textsuperscript{\textregistered} Xeon\textsuperscript{\textregistered}
CPU E5-2697 v2 2.70\si{\giga\hertz} processors and 256 GB of RAM running CentOS
Linux release 7.7.1908 (x86\_64). Parallel CPU implementations use Intel's
OpenMP library, \texttt{libiomp5}. GPU tests used the same node with an
NVIDIA\textsuperscript{\textregistered} Tesla\textsuperscript{\textregistered}
K80 ($2\times$GK210 GPU with 13 823.5\si{\mega\hertz} multiprocessors and 12
GB of global memory each). Only one of the GK210 GPUs was used. The CPU code
was written in C++17 and the GPU code was written in C++/CUDA and used version
9.2 CUDA libraries. Both the CPU and GPU code were compiled using
\texttt{clang} version 7.0.1.

\subsection{Unstructured IB points}

We first consider a set of $n$ IB points randomly placed in the domain
described above. The IB points are imagined to be tethered to their initial
positions. The fluid solver is not invoked for these tests. Instead, at each
timestep, interpolate the fluid velocity to each of the IB points and predict
updated positions for the IB points. Compute a Hookean force with spring
constant $0.01\si{dyn\per\centi\meter}$. Spread these forces to the fluid grid,
but do not use them to update the fluid velocity. Instead, discard the forces
in such a way that the force calculation is not optimized away. This ensures
that the points do not settle into a steady position and the spread and
interpolate operations receive new data each timestep. Finally, interpolate the
velocity to each of the IB points again and update the position of the IB
points. While the interpolated velocities are the same as those computed at the
beginning of the timestep, this is done by analogy to the fluid solver, which
interpolates fluid velocities twice and spreads forces once per timestep. The
timestep used is $k = 0.1\ms$.

We use this test to compare the performance of the parallel algorithms to
their serial counterparts and, for the spread variants, to each other.


\input{grid-dependence}
\input{serial-comparison}

\subsection{Red Blood Cells}

We are motivated by the desire to simulate the motion of cells immersed in a
fluid. Cells are not randomly generated points, but cohesive structures, kept
together by elastic forces and the near-constant volume maintained by their
membranes. In this section, we replace the randomly-placed IB points with
points sampled on the surface of a red blood cell (RBC). We track $n_d$ data
sites per RBC, and interpolate fluid velocities only to these points. We
construct an RBF interpolant based on the positions of the data sites and
evaluate forces at $n_s$ sample sites, chosen so that neighboring sample sites
are initially within aproximately $0.5h$ of each other. We spread forces from
the sample sites. It is generally the case that $n_s > n_d$, so that we
interpolate to fewer points than we spread from. These point sets are generated
by the \texttt{KernelNode} library. In this case, we invoke the fluid solver,
so that as the RBC deforms, the force it imparts on the fluid will affect the
fluid velocity. The RBC is modeled as an elastic structure, obeying the Skalak
constitutive law [@Skalak:XXX] with shear modulus $2.5\times10^{-3}\dynpercm$
and bulk modulus $2.5\times10^{-1}\dynpercm$, with rest configuration given
in [@Omori:XXX]:
\begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
        x(\theta,\,\phi) &= R_0\cos\theta\cos\phi, \\
        y(\theta,\,\phi) &= R_0\sin\theta\cos\phi, \\
        z(\theta,\,\phi) &= \sfrac12 R_0\sin\phi\left[0.21 + 2.0 \cos^2\phi -1.12 \cos^4\phi\right],
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
where $R_0=3.91\um$, $\theta\in[-\pi,\,\pi)$, and $\phi\in[-\pi/2,\,\pi/2]$.
The timestep required for stability in this test is $k=0.1\us$. In this case,
an IB point requires at least 32 timesteps to transit a grid cell, so unlike
the tests using randomly placed IB points above, there will be considerably
more redundant computation.

We first validate the fluid solver for these tests, and then perform similar
scaling tests as above.

\input{convergence-study}
\input{strong-scaling}
\input{weak-scaling}
